---
anki_note_id: 1745246389082
anki_note_mod: 1745793939
content_hash: 69762a9408e70c60e6a638d457346b13
---

## 1. 📊 What causes inequalities in the world and how it is perpetuated?

Inequalities are caused due to multiple factors such as economic, ethnic, location ➡️Conventional (3) and modern. However, it continues because of growth model  ➡️ one section more benifit than other cus of growth.

## 2. What are the 2 models of growth?  
1.

Trickle down Approach

## 3. 2.

Inclusive Growth

## 4. 📉 What is the trickle-down approach to growth?

This is a focused approach to growth where the resources, efforts, policies, etc. are diverted towards the top of the economic pyramid i.e., high potential for growth, profits and employment ➡️ For example, Government gives subsidies or frames policies such as the PLI scheme (Production linked incentive) to assist in accessing the capital of certain sectors ➡️ This means that there will be sectors/regions that will be at the receiving end of the growth policies ➡️ The assumption is that the benefits of growth from all over the economy would trickle down to those fields that were not at the focus i.e. trickle down of the fruits of growth → reap a tree and its fruits will trickle down to other trees for manure / seeds

## 5. 🔍 What are the assumptions that determine whether benefits actually trickle down in the trickle-down approach and what is the problem with it?

The assumptions are:   
1) Whether the growth occurs at the desired pace   
2) Whether the government was able to collect resources due to this high growth i.e. efficiency of tax collection (Tax buoyancy)   
3) Whether the government was able to divert their resources or utilize them elsewhere or use them in providing benefits to those that were left out (Expenditure policies)  
  
problem:  
These assumptions may not all be true at once and therefore the people at the bottom receive benefits only as passive beneficiaries of the growth process ➡️ They are dependent on the government discretion along with rising rates of these assumptions to operate

## 6. 🌱 What is inclusive growth and how does it differ from trickle-down approach?

This is the model of growth in which the people at the bottom are not merely passive recipients rather see active contributors to the growth process ➡️ The Trickle-down approach to inequality is reducing only temporarily while inclusive growth ensures permanent reduction in income inequality ➡️ The people at the bottom are active contributors, therefore they claim the benefits of growth as a matter of right rather than governments discretion

## 7. 🔧 What factors are required to enable people at the bottom to be active contributors to growth?

In order to enable them to be active contributors relies on the following:   
1) Identification of the most vulnerable WHO  
2) Addressing their vulnerabilities WHAT  
3) Skill development SKILL Badhegi  
4) Industrial development INDUSTRIAL INTEREST BENIFIT  = (More productivity and more access to quality HR)  
5) Job creation relevant to the people at the bottom EVEN MORE JOBS (misc. decreased naxalism)  
6) Access to institutions (to make above possible, education dene ke liye institution banane padenge)  
etc.

## 8. Main diff btw trickle down and Inclusive growth?

Both recognises inequality BUT →   
TD approach = Resource collection + focused growth first  
Inclusive growth = sabka saath sabka vikaas  
i.e. difference of emphasis.