---
imp: ""
difficulty: ""
date: 2025-06-12T00:00:00.000+05:30
subject:
  - Economics
  - Society and Social issues
  - Polity and Governance
content: |
  - 'Viksit Krishi Sankalp Abhiyan' concluded, reaching 1.12 crore farmers in 1 lakh villages.
  - Campaign aimed to connect 'Lab to Land', sharing research and addressing farmer issues.
  - Focus on natural farming, technology use, food processing, and value addition for growth.
Subtopic: Agricultural policies and schemes, Farmer welfare, Rural development, Sustainable agriculture
Ministry: Department of Agricultural Research and Education
Place: Bardoli, Gujarat
---

## Formal conclusion of 15-day ‘Viksit Krishi Sankalp Abhiyan’

### Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan interacted with farmers after visiting various statesUnion Agriculture Minister addressed farmers in Bardoli, Gujarat today on the last day of the campaignMore than 55 thousand programs, reach to more than 1 lakh villages and interaction with about 1 crore 12 lakh farmersRapid progress in Gujarat's agriculture through food processing and value addition - Shri ChouhanEfforts for natural farming in Gujarat are great, farmers are doing wonders - Shri Shivraj SinghGujarat ranks first in specific agricultural products like castor, cumin, fennel and dates - Shri ChouhanThis year the target of natural farming on 7.5 lakh hectares of land - Shri Shivraj SinghUnion Agriculture Minister Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan congratulated the scientists for their commendable participation in the campaign

Union Minister of Agriculture, Farmers Welfare and Rural Development, Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan today addressed the Kisan Sammelan in Bardoli, Gujarat on the 15th and last day of the 'Viksit Krishi Sankalp Abhiyan'. With the formal announcement of the end of the campaign, Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan said that although the campaign is ending today, the process of contact and dialogue with the farmers will continue.

While addressing, Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan said that I feel fortunate to be on this Karmabhoomi of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. On this day, 12 June 1928, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel had held a meeting for the Bardoli Satyagraha. He had started a struggle against the increase of 22 percent tax on farmers by the British. Women played a major role in this Satyagraha and this is why Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel was awarded the title of Sardar. It is because of the Iron Man Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel that India is united today. Vallabhbhai Patel played an incomparable role in merging more than 550 princely states. Gujarat is the land of many great men. Saints, sages, maharishis, revolutionaries and Mahatma Gandhi who gave direction to the country and the world are gifts of this land. Our distinguished Prime Minister is also such a gift of Gujarat to the country, for which the whole country will remain indebted to Gujarat.

Shri Shivraj Singh Chauhan said that 'Viksit Krishi Sankalp Abhiyan' was started to further the vision of 'Lab to Land' of Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi. Agriculture is the backbone of the Indian economy. Agriculture contributes 18 percent to the economy. Even today, half the population is dependent on agriculture for livelihood. Under this campaign, 2,170 teams of 16 thousand scientists were formed. Teams of scientists went from village to village and communicated directly with the farmers and provided them with the correct information about the research. Keeping in mind the climatic conditions of the area and the need of the field, information was given to the farmers. Information was given on the use of balanced fertilizers and pesticides. Along with this, after listening to the problems of the farmers, the work of deciding the direction of further research in the future was also done. Shri Shivraj Singh praised the efforts of the Gujarat government and said that the efforts of natural farming in Gujarat are excellent, farmers are doing wonders. Along with this, technology is also being used on a large scale in farming here, which has benefited the farmers immensely. Paddy, wheat, groundnut, maize, soybean is produced in Gujarat. Gujarat ranks first in specific agricultural products like castor, cumin, fennel, dates. 77 percent castor, 44.5 percent groundnut, 24 percent cotton, 15 percent gram production in the country is being done by Gujarat only. Gujarat is progressing rapidly in the agricultural sector through food processing and value addition. The farmers of Gujarat are constantly moving forward and are showing direction to the country. Many products are exported from Gujarat. The farmers of Gujarat are also progressing through food processing and value addition. Gujarat is also advanced in the field of horticulture. Shri Shivraj Singh said that many farmers shared their experiences with me regarding natural farming. It was a pleasure to hear from the farmers that natural farming reduces costs and production is also not affected and quality products are obtained. There are six formulas for improving farming – increasing production, reducing the cost of production, ensuring fair prices to farmers for their produce, proper compensation in case of loss, agricultural diversification and keeping the earth safe for the coming generation by maintaining the fertility of the soil.

Shri Shivraj Singh said that although the 'Viksit Krishi Sankalp Abhiyan' is formally ending today, but this is not the end. With the spirit of 'One Nation-One Agriculture-One Team', there will be continuous contact and communication with the farmers. Use of advanced varieties in farming, mechanization, more crop per drop, better use of water in irrigation, use of new seeds are necessary, in which direction we have to move forward. He said that this year the target of natural farming has been set on seven and a half lakh hectares of land. 18 lakh farmers have also agreed for this. We are working day and night to fulfill this objective that agriculture should be advanced and along with prosperity, smile should come on the faces of the farmers.

In the end, Shri Shivraj Singh Chauhan announced the formal end of the campaign and congratulated all the scientists for their remarkable participation in the campaign. He said that I am happy to tell that around 1 crore 12 lakh farmers have been communicated under this campaign and access has been ensured to more than 1 lakh villages. Dialogue programs were held at more than 55 thousand places. During this campaign, we also met such farmers who have increased their income up to 10 times by taking advantage of new innovations and schemes. Such farmers are truly scientists, from whom we will also get guidance. Taking all such experiences and efforts, we will decide the future policies of agriculture and will make agriculture better.

On this occasion, Gujarat Chief Minister Shri Bhupendrabhai Patel, Gujarat Agriculture Minister Raghavjibhai Patel, Labor and Employment Minister Shri Kunwarji Halpati, MP Prabhubhai Vasava, Mukesh Kumar Chandrakant Dalal, MLAs from various areas, District Panchayat heads, DG of Indian Council of Agricultural Research -ICAR and Secretary of Department of Agricultural Research and Education Dr. ML Jat, senior officials were present. 2,170 teams of scientists formed under this campaign also participated virtually.

This nationwide 15-day campaign started from Odisha on 29 May, after which the Union Agriculture Minister visited various states and interacted with farmers through Kisan Chaupals, conferences and padyatras. Under this campaign, Shri Shivraj Singh Chouhan visited Odisha, Jammu, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Bihar, Maharashtra, Punjab, Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Telangana, Delhi, Gujarat.

AP/IJ/GP/JD
[Urdu](https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2136022)[Marathi](https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2136037)[Gujarati](https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2135919)[Tamil](https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2136020)[Malayalam](https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2136087)